Coopers Hill. [MS V.a.160] [Written by mr. Denham to mr. Waller.

Sure we have Poetts that did never dreame
Upon Parnassus; nor did tast the streame
Of Helicon, & therefore I suppose
Those made not Poetts but the poets those.
And as Courts make, not Kings, but Kings the Court
Soe where the Muses & theyr troopes resort
Parnassus stands ; if I can be to thee
A Poett, thou Parnassus art to me,
Whose top when I ascend I seeme more high,
More boundlesse in my fancy then my eye:
As those whoe rail'd in body or in thought
Above the Earth or the Aires middle vault
Behold how windes & stormes & Meteors grow,
How cloudes condense to raine, congeale to snow,
The Aire, secure from danger & from feare;
Soe to this height exalted I looke downe
On Pauls, as men from thence upon the towne.
Pauls the late theame of such a Muse whose flight [Mr. Waller's Poem.
Hath bravely reacht & soar'd above thy height,
Now shalt thou stand, though time or sword or fire
Or Zeale more feirce then they thy fall conspire,
Secure, while thee the best of Poetts sings
Preserv'd from ruine by the best of Kings.
Then London where my eye, the place, the crowd
My minde surveyes wrapt in a thicker cloud
Of businesse then of smoake; where men like Ants
Toyle to prevent imaginary wants,
Yet all in vaine, increasing with theyr store
Theyr vast desires, but make their wants the more,
As food to unsound bodies, though it please
The appetite, feedes only the disease.
Where with like hast, though sev'rall wayes they run,
Some to undoe, & some to be undon.
Where Luxury & wealth like warre & peace
Are each the others ruine & increase;
As rivers lost in Seas, some secret vaine
Thence reconveyes, there to be lost againe.
Oh happinesse of sweet retir'd content
To be at once secure & Innocent.
Windsor, the next (where Mars & Venus dwells
Beauty with strength, above the valley swells
Into mine eye, as the late married Dame
Whoe proud, yet seames to make that pride her shame
When Nature quickens in her pregnant wombe
Her wishes past, & now her hopes to come;
With such an easie & unforc't ascent
Windsor her gentle bosome doth present;
Where noe stupendious cliffs, noe threatning heights
Accesse deny, now horrid stoope affrights,
But such a Rise as doth at once invite
A pleasure & a reuerence from the sight.
Thy masters Embleme: in whose face I saw
A freindlike sweetnesse & a kinglike awe,
Where maiestie & love soe mixt appeare,
Both gently kinde, both royally severe;
Soe Windsor humble in it selfe seemes proude
To be the base of that maiestick loade,
Then wch noe hill a nobler burthen beares
But Atlas only that supports the Spheares.
Nature this mount soe fitly did advance
She might conclude that nothing is by chance;
Soe plac'd as if she did on purpose raise
The hill, to robb the builder of his praise.
For none comends his iudgement that doth chuse
That wch a blindeman onely could refuse;
Such are the Towers wch th'hoary Temples grace
Of Cybele when all har heavenly race
Doe homage to har, yet she cannot boast
Amongst that numerous, & celestiall hoast
More Heroes then can Windsor, nor doth Fames
Immortal booke record more noble names.
Not to looke backe so farre (to whome this Isle
Must owe the glorie of soe brave a pile)
Whither to Cæsar, Abbanact, or Brute
The Brittish Arthur or the Danish Knute:
Though this of old now lesse contest did move
Then when for Homers birth seaven Citties strove,
Like him in birth, thou shouldst be like in fame
As thine his face, if mine had bin his flame.
But whosoere it was, Nature design'd
First a brave place, & then as brave a minde;
Nor to recount those sev'rall Kings to whome
It gave a Cradle or to whome a Tombe;
But thee great Edward & thy greater sonne
He that the lillies wore & he that wonne:
And great Bellona whoe deserves her share [The Kings of France & Scotland.
In all thy glories of that royall paire
Wch waited on thy Triumph, she brought one
Thy sonne the other brought & she that sonne:
Nor of lesse hopes could the great ofspring prove
A Royall Eagle cannot breed a Dove.
Then didst thou found that order (wither love [The Garter.
Or Victorie thy royall thoughts did move)
Each was a noble cause ; nor was it lesse
In th'institution, then the great successe,
The king, the cause, the Patron & the place;
Which forraine kings & emperors esteeme
oThe second honor to theyr Diademe.
Had thy great destiny but given thee skill
To know, as well as power, to act her will,
That from those kings whoe then thy captives were
In after times should spring a royall paire
Whoe should possesse all that thy mighty power
Or thy desires more mighty, did devoure,
To whome theyr better fate reserves what ere
The Victor hopes for, or the Vanquisht feare,
That blood wch thou & thy great grandsire shed,
And all that since these sister nations bled
Had bin unspilt had happie Edward knowne
That all the bloud he spilt had bin his owne:
Thou hadst extended through the conquer'd East
Thine & the Christian name & made them blest
To serve thee, while that losse this gaine would bring
Christ for theyr God & Edward for theyr King.
When thou that saint thy patron didst designe
In whome the martyr & the souldier ioyne;
(Whoe evill thinks may evill him confound)
The English Armes encircle, thou dids't seeme
But to fortell & prophesie of him,
Whow hath within that Azure round confin'd
These Realmes wch Nature for theyr bounds design'd:
Endlesse her selfe hir liquid Armes extends.
In whose heroique face I see the saint
Better exprest, then in the liveliest paint.
That Fortitude wch made him famous heere,
That heavenly Piety wch Saints him there;
Whoe when this order he forsakes, may he
Companion of that sacred order be.
Heere could I fix my wonder, but our eyes
(Nice as our tasts) affect varieties.
And though one please him most, the hungry guest
Tasts every dish & runnes through all the feast
Soe having tasted Windsor, casting round
My Wandring eye, an Emulous hill doth bound
My more contracted sight, whose top of late
A Chappel crown'd, till in the comon fate [Chersy Abby.
The neighb'ring Abby fell; may noe such storme
Fall on our times where ruine must reforme.
Tell me my muse what monstrous dire offence,
What crime could any Christian king incense
To such a rage? was't luxurie or lust?
Was he soe temperat, soe chast, so iust?
Were these theyr crimes? they were his owne much more
But they (alas) were rich & he was poore;
And having spent the treasures of his crowne
Condemns theyr luxury to feede his owne;
And yet this Art to varnish ore the shame
If sacriledge, must beare devotions name.
And he might thinke it iust, the cause, the time
Consider'd well for none comitts a crime
Appearing such, but as 'tis understood
A reall or at least a seeming good.
While for the Church his learned pen disputes
His much more learned sword his pen confutes.
Thus to the Ages past he makes amends
Theyr charity destroyes, theyr fayth defends.
Then did Religion in a lazy Cell
In empty ayrie contemplations dwell,
And like the block unmoved lay, but ours
As much to achive, like the storke devours.
Is there noe temp'rat Region can be knowne
Betwixt theyr frigid & our torrid zone?
Could we not wake from that Letargique dreame
But to be restlesse in a worse extreame?
And for that Lethargie was there now cure
But to be cast into a Calenture?
Can knowledge haue noe bound? but must advance
Soe farre, to make us wish for ignorance?
And rather in the darke to grope our way
Then ledd by a false guide to erre by day?
Parting from thence, twixt Anger, shame & feare
Those for what's past & this for what's too neare,
My eye descending from the hill survayes
Where Thames amongst the wanton valleyes strayes.
Sweet Thames the eldest & the noblest sonne
Of old Oceanus doth swiftly runne,
Hasting to pay his tribute to the sea
Like mortall life to meete Eternitie:
And though his clearer sand noe golden vaynes
(Like Tagues & Pactolus streames contaynes)
His genuine & lesse guilty wealth t'explore
Search not his bottome but behold his shore.
Ore wch he kindly spreads his spacious wing
And hatches plenty for th'ensuing spring;
Nor with an angry & unruly waue
(Like profuse Kings) resumes the wealth he gaue.
Noe unexspected mundations spoile
The mowers hopes, nor wocke the plowmans toyle.
Then like a Lover he forsakes his shores,
Wose stay with ielous eyes his spouse implores,
Till with a parting kisse he saves his teares,
And promising returne secures her feares.
As a wise king, first settles fruitfull peace
In his owne Realmes & with theyr rich increase
Seakes warrs abroad & then in triumph brings
The spoyles of kingdomes & the Crownes of Kings.
Soe Thames to London doth at first present
Those Tributes wch the neighb'ring Countries sent,
But at his second visit from the East
Spices he brings & treasures from the West;
Finds wealth where 'tis & gives it where it wants
Cities in desarts, woods in Cities plants;
Soe that to us noe thing noe place is strange
While thy faire bosome is the worlds exchange
And on thy streames as many nations floate
As when mankinde all soiourn'd in one boate.
O could my lines fully & smoothly flow
As thy pure floud, heaven should noe longer know
Her old Eridanus, thy purer streame
Should bathe the Gods & be the Poetts theame.
Heere Nature, whither more intent to please [The forrest.
Us or her selfe with strange varieties,
For things of wonder move noe lesse delight
To the wise makers then beholders sight:
Though these delights from sev'rall causes move,
For soe our children, thus our freinds we love;
Wisely she knew the harmony of things
As well as that of sounds from discord springs:
Such was the discord wch did first disperse
Forme, Beauty, order through the universe.
While Moisture, drinesse, coldnesse heat resists
All that we have or that we are subsists.
While the steepe horrid roughnesse of the wood
Strives with the gentle calmnesse of the flood,
And huge extreames when Nature doth invite
Wonder from thence results, from thence delight.
The streame is soe transparent pure & cleare,
That had that selfe inamor'd youth gaz'd heare,
Soe fatally deceiv'd he had not bin
While he the bottome not his face had seane.
And such the roughnesse of the hill on wch
Dian her toyles & Mars his tents might pitch:
And as our angry supercilious Lords
Bigg in theyr frownes & haughty in theyr words
Looke downe on those whose humble fruitfull raine
Theyr proud & barren greatnesse must maintaine
Soe lookes the hill upone the streame. Betweene [Egham Meade.
There lies a spacious & fertile greene
Where from the woods the Dryades oft meate
The Nayades, & with theyre nimble feete
Soft dances leade, allthough theyr angry shape
All but a quicke Poeticke sight escape.
Thus Faunus & Silvanus keape theyr courts
And hither all the horned hoast resorts
(When like th'Elixar with his evening beames
The Sun hath turn'd to gold the silver streames)
To graze the ranker meade: That noble Heard
On whose sublime & shady fronts is rear'd
Nature's great Masterpeece, to shew how soone
Great things are made but sooner farre undone.
Heere haue I seen o Charles when great affaires
Give leave to slacken & unbend his cares
Chasing the royall stagg: The gallant beast
Rowsed with noyse, twixt hope & feare distreast
Resolves tis better to avoyde then meete
His danger, trusting to hi winged feete:
But when he sees the Dogs now by the veiw
Now by the sent, his speede with speede pursue,
He tryes his freindes amongst the lesser herd
Where he but lately was obeyd & fear'd
Safety he seekes. The herd unkindly wise
Or chases him from thence or from him flyes,
Like a declining statesman left forlorne
To his freindes pittie or pursuers scorne.
Wearied, forsaken, & pursude at last
All safety in despaire of safety plac'd
Courage he thance assumes, resolv'd to beare
All theyr assaults when 'tis in vaine to feare,
But when he sees the Eager chase renew'd
Himselfe by doggs, the doggs by men pursude,
When neyther speede nor art, nor freinds nor force
Could helpe him, tow'rds the streame he bends his course
Hoping those lesser beasts would not assay
An Element more mercilesse then they,
But fearelesse they pursue, nor can the floud
Quench theyr dire thirst, alas they thirst for bloud.
As in a Calme the Oare=finn'd Galleyes creepe
About a windebound & unweldy Shipp
Wch lyes unmov'd, but those that come too neare
Strikes with her thunder & the rest with feare,
Till through her many leakes the sea she drinks,
Nor yeildes at last but still resisting sinkes;
Soe stands the stagg among the lesser hounds,
Repells theyr forces & wounds returnes for wounds:
Till Charles from his unerring hand lets fly
A mortall shaft, then glad & proud to dye
By such a wound he falls, the Christall floud
Dying he dyes & purples with his bloud.
This a more innocent & happie chase [Rumney meade where ye gt. charter was first seal'd.
Then when of old but in ye. selfe same place
Faire libertie pursude, & meant a pray
To Tyranny heare turn'd & shod at Bay.
When in that remedy all hope was plac'd
Wch. was, or should at least have bin the last;
For armed suiects can haue noe pretence
Against theyr princes, but theyr iust defence
And wither then or noe Gleane to them
To iustice, whoe else themselves condemne;
Yet might the fact be iust, if we may guesse
The iustnesse of an action from successe.
Heere was that Charter seal'd wherein ye crowne [Magna Charta.
All markes of Arbitrary power layes downe.
Tyrant & slave, those names of have & feare
The happier stile of king & subiect beare.
And yet not long in force this Charter stood
The Counterpart was often seald in bloud.
The subiects arm'd, the more the Princes gave,
But his advantage tooke the more to crave;
And as by giving the kings power growes lesse,
Soe by receiving theyr demands increase:
To limitt regall greatnesse all conspire,
While each forgetts to limitt his desire;
Till kings, like old Antæus by theyr fall
Reenforc't, theyr courage from despaire recall.
When a Calme river rais'd with suddaine raines
Or snowes dissolv'd oreflowes the adioyning plaines,
The husbandmen with high rais'd blanks secure
Theyr hopes, & this he can endure;
But if with bayes & damms they striue to force
His channell to a new or narrow course,
Noe longer then within his bounds he dwells,
First to a torrent, then a Deluge swells;
Stronger & feircer by restraint he roares
And knowes noe bounds, but makes his power his shores.
Thus kings by grasping more then they could hold
First by oppression made theyr suiects bold;
And popular sway (by forcing kings to give
More then was fitt for subiects to receive)
Ran to the same extreame, & one excesse
Made both by striving to be greater, lesse:
Nor any way but seeking to haue more
Makes eyther loose, what they possest before.
Therefore theyr boundlesse power let princes draw
Within the Channels & the shores of Law,
And may that law wch teaches kings to sway
Theyr scepters, teach theyr suiects to obay.
